AI #2014: Add billing scenario examples (#2022)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/appendix/saas_examples/billing_scenario_examples.md

Reviewer: I'm generally uncomfortable with using real-world providers in these examples.  You make reference to MongoDB and Atlassian in these examples, neither of which currently generate FOCUS data -- and it could be very dangerous indeed to have statements like these in the spec that do not necessarily correspond to their implementations if/when they support FOCUS.

Please genericize the examples through this appendix.

Author: Replaced all real provider names with fictional equivalents: QuickSend (email API), ClearQuery (data platform), WatchTower (observability), TaskBoard Co (project management), CloudDB (PaaS database), TeamSpace (team communication), GrowthCRM (CRM). Each name is distinct to avoid cross-scenario confusion. (f6e3756)

Reviewer 2: I would be good to get these as a general naming convention. Makes for easier reading when the names are known to the reader.

Reviewer: @Matt-Cowsert I'm not seeing you use these names anywhere in `billing_scenario_examples.md`.  Please add them. 

For example:

> A data platform service provider uses a credit-based consumption model.

Per your message above, this should be:

> A data platform service provider ClearQuery uses a credit-based consumption model.

(Or similar.)

Please apply that pattern throughout.

Reviewer: Also, agree with @rileyjenk.  Let's not bloat scope with this PR, but as a mental note for the future, let's consider adding these fictitious companies to a guidelines file.

Author: Done. Each example now names its service provider in the opening sentence (e.g., "A data platform service provider, ClearQuery, uses a credit-based consumption model."). Applied across all 7 examples.

Reviewer: Confirmed, looks good now.

Reviewer: You might consider adding this provider list to the overview section -- or maybe adding the name of the fictitious provider to the Scenario table.  You have it in the PR summary, and I found it oddly helpful.

| Scenario | Provider | Billing Pattern |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Credit-based consumption | ClearQuery | On-demand virtual currency credits + storage |
| Host-based SaaS monitoring | WatchTower | Monthly on-demand with mixed charge frequencies |
| Seat-based SaaS annual subscription | TaskBoard Co | Annual upfront payment as a commitment discount with amortized usage |
| Multi-unit PaaS database | CloudDB | On-demand database-as-a-service with heterogeneous pricing units |
| Flat-rate SaaS licensing | TeamSpace | Fixed monthly subscription, single billable unit |
| Annual commitment billed monthly | GrowthCRM | Annual contract with no cost divergence (BilledCost = EffectiveCost) |
| Tiered pricing with committed minimum | QuickSend | Plan-included email allowance, Used/Unused tracking, per-email overage |

Reviewer: Looks good!

The provider's on-demand pricing for this example (Enterprise edition):

| Service | SKU | Unit Price | Pricing Unit |
| :------ | :-- | ---------: | :----------- |
| Virtual Warehouse Compute | XS Warehouse | &dollar;3.00 | Credit |
| Virtual Warehouse Compute | Medium Warehouse | &dollar;3.00 | Credit |
| Storage | Active Storage | &dollar;23.00 | TB |

Credit consumption varies by warehouse size. An XS warehouse consumes 1 credit per hour. A Medium warehouse consumes 4 credits per hour.

A customer runs two warehouses in the US East region during January 2025:

* XS warehouse (analyst workload): 200 hours of runtime = 200 credits consumed
* Medium warehouse (ETL workload): 80 hours of runtime = 320 credits consumed (4 credits/hour)
* 5 TB of active storage

Three usage charges appear on the January invoice:

* XS Warehouse: `200 Credits x &dollar;3.00` = &dollar;600.00
* Medium Warehouse: `320 Credits x &dollar;3.00` = &dollar;960.00
* Active Storage: `5 TB x &dollar;23.00` = &dollar;115.00

Total [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost): &dollar;1,675.00

Key observations:

> * [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) are equal on all rows. With no related purchase charges, the [*cash-based*](#glossary:cash-based-accounting) and [*accrual-based*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) costs align.

Reviewer 3: this line could use a bit more explanation. It could speak more clearly to why, and the connection between Billed Cost, EffectiveCost, Cash-Based and Accural-Based. It reads more as a self-evident truth than an explanation, currently.

Author: Good call. Updated this bullet across all four on-demand sections (c9e9a88). It now explains that BilledCost and EffectiveCost diverge when a purchase charge covers future usage (as with a commitment discount), because the cash outflow is invoiced upfront while cost is recognized on an accrual basis over time. With no purchase charges in on-demand scenarios, the two views produce the same cost per row.

Reviewer: Confirmed with @gparker-at-sf we can close.

* 25 infrastructure hosts monitored
* 10 APM hosts monitored (a subset of the infrastructure hosts, billed independently)
* 150 GB of logs ingested

Three usage charges appear on the January invoice:

* Infrastructure Monitoring: `25 Hosts x &dollar;18.00` = &dollar;450.00
* APM: `10 Hosts x &dollar;36.00` = &dollar;360.00
* Log Management: `150 GB x &dollar;0.10` = &dollar;15.00

Total [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost): &dollar;825.00

Key observations:

* [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) are equal on all rows. With no related purchase charges, the [*cash-based*](#glossary:cash-based-accounting) and [*accrual-based*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) costs align.
* [ChargeFrequency](#datasets.costandusage.chargefrequency) is "Recurring" for the host-based *services* (billed per host per month regardless of utilization within the month) and "Usage-Based" for log ingestion (billed on actual volume consumed).
* APM hosts are a subset of infrastructure hosts but each *service* is billed independently. The 10 APM hosts also appear in the 25 infrastructure host count.

> * No [RegionId](#datasets.costandusage.regionid) or [RegionName](#datasets.costandusage.regionname) values are present. As a SaaS platform, billing is not region-specific.

Reviewer 3: why is this true?

Author: Fair point. Updated (c9e9a88) to avoid implying SaaS never has regional billing. Some SaaS/PaaS providers like Snowflake and Databricks already price by cloud provider and region. The new text says this provider doesn't expose region in its billing, and cross-references the Multi-Unit PaaS example where RegionId is populated.

Reviewer: Confirmed with @gparker-at-sf we can close.

The provider's on-demand pricing for this example:

| Service | SKU | Unit Price | Pricing Unit |
| :------ | :-- | ---------: | :----------- |
| Atlas Dedicated Clusters | M10 Cluster | &dollar;0.08 | Hour |
| Atlas Dedicated Clusters | M30 Cluster | &dollar;0.54 | Hour |
| Atlas Storage | SSD Storage | &dollar;0.25 | GB |
| Atlas Data Transfer | Data Transfer Out | &dollar;0.01 | GB |

A customer runs two dedicated database clusters in the US East region for the full month of January 2025 (744 hours). They also consume 100 GB of SSD storage and 50 GB of outbound data transfer.

* 1x M10 cluster (analytics workload): 744 hours at &dollar;0.08/hour
* 1x M30 cluster (production workload): 744 hours at &dollar;0.54/hour
* 100 GB of SSD storage
* 50 GB of outbound data transfer

Four usage charges appear on the January invoice:

* M10 Cluster: `744 Hours x &dollar;0.08` = &dollar;59.52
* M30 Cluster: `744 Hours x &dollar;0.54` = &dollar;401.76
* SSD Storage: `100 GB x &dollar;0.25` = &dollar;25.00

> * Data Transfer Out: `50 GB x &dollar;0.01` = &dollar;0.50

Reviewer 3: some of these $signs werent rendering correctly; doublecheck

Author: These use `&dollar;` HTML entities, which is the pattern used across the existing SaaS examples in the spec. They render correctly in the GitHub Pages build but show as raw `&dollar;` in the GitHub markdown preview. This is a known rendering difference.

Reviewer: Confirmed with @gparker-at-sf we can close.

Total [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost): &dollar;486.78

Key observations:

* [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) are equal on all rows. With no related purchase charges, the [*cash-based*](#glossary:cash-based-accounting) and [*accrual-based*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) costs align.

> * Three different [PricingUnit](#datasets.costandusage.pricingunit) values appear within a single provider: Hours (compute), GB (storage), and GB (data transfer). This heterogeneity is typical for PaaS database *services*.

Reviewer 3: why is this in italics?

Author: That's glossary term formatting per the FOCUS editorial guidelines. First occurrence in a section uses `[*term*](#glossary:term)` (italic + linked), subsequent occurrences use `*term*` (italic only, no link). The italics signal that "services" is a defined glossary term with a specific meaning in the spec.

Reviewer: Confirmed with @gparker-at-sf we can close.

> # Billing Scenario Examples

Reviewer: Would be helpful to add an overview table running down all the examples.  Here is a quick AI-gen example; please modify to taste.  You'd want to add anchor links to each of the names to jump to the relevant section.  It would also be good to harmonize with the overview table(s) added to #1877, for consistency's sake.

### Billing Scenario Overview

| Scenario | Example Provider Type | Primary `ChargeFrequency` | Key FOCUS Concepts Demonstrated | `CommitmentDiscount`? |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Credit-Based Consumption** | Data Platform | Usage-Based, Recurring | Custom consumption units (Credits), BilledCost = EffectiveCost | No |
| **Host-Based SaaS Monitoring** | Observability | Recurring, Usage-Based | Independent service billing, multiple metrics (Hosts vs. GB) | No |
| **Seat-Based SaaS Subscription** | Project Management | One-Time, Recurring | Upfront purchase amortization, BilledCost vs. EffectiveCost divergence | Yes (Spend) |
| **Multi-Unit Usage-Based PaaS** | Database-as-a-Service | Usage-Based, Recurring | Region-specific billing, heterogeneous pricing units (Hours, GB) | No |
| **Flat-Rate SaaS Licensing** | Team Communication | Recurring | Fixed subscription unit decoupled from underlying user count | No |
| **Annual Commitment Billed Monthly** | CRM | Recurring | Term contracts without upfront payment or unit discounts | No |
| **Tiered Pricing with Committed Minimum** | Email API Platform | Recurring, Usage-Based | Minimum capacity modeling, Unused waste, Usage overages | Yes (Usage) |

Author: Added a two-column overview table (Scenario + What You'll Learn) matching the format in #1877's Data Generator Scenarios tables. Each scenario links to its heading and the description highlights the key FOCUS concepts demonstrated. (c382551)

Reviewer: Confirmed; resolving.

> The following examples illustrate how BilledCost and EffectiveCost behave across common SaaS and PaaS billing models. Each scenario uses publicly available pricing and demonstrates a distinct billing pattern that SaaS or PaaS data generators may encounter when implementing the FOCUS specification.

Reviewer: Might seem like a given, but would be good to spell out SaaS and PaaS in the first use.  Also, I want to tweak the end of that paragraph to be less data generator focused, more focused on the general reader, and framing the implementation more as a "past tense" than "future tense".

```suggestion
The following examples illustrate how BilledCost and EffectiveCost behave across common software as a service (SaaS) and platform as a service (PaaS) billing models. Each scenario uses publicly available pricing and demonstrates a distinct billing pattern that SaaS or PaaS data generators may implement via the FOCUS specification.
```

Author: Accepted your suggestion. Also added column ID links for BilledCost and EffectiveCost on first use in the same paragraph. (a7a435c + f6e3756)

> These examples complement the existing SaaS examples by covering credit-based consumption, host-based monitoring, seat-based annual subscriptions, multi-unit PaaS usage, flat-rate licensing, annual commitment billed monthly, and tiered pricing with committed minimums. Each CSV includes only the columns relevant to its scenario. On-demand examples omit [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) columns; examples without regional billing omit [RegionId](#datasets.costandusage.regionid) and [RegionName](#datasets.costandusage.regionname).

Reviewer: I get why you've cut certain columns from certain examples, and you've obviously called it out here explicitly -- but for the purposes of consistency, should we perhaps include them anyway?

Stated different: should all CSV's in a given subfolder carry the same column set, even if the examples they depict involve varying applicability criteria?  

Curious for you to bring this to TF-3 and see what the group thinks.  And particularly interested in @ijurica's opinion.

Author: Agreed this is worth discussing. Each CSV intentionally includes only the columns relevant to its scenario (called out in the intro), but I can see the argument for a consistent column set. Will bring this to TF-3 for group input on the tradeoff between clarity and consistency.

Reviewer: Sounds good.  Let me know the outcome of today's TF-3 discussion.

Reviewer: And regardless of the outcome (to be clear, I'm in support of consistency across the examples), here's something to note:

### Contradiction of the "Omitted Columns" Rule

**The Issue:** The introductory text explicitly states: *"examples without regional billing omit `RegionId` and `RegionName`."* * `host_based_saas_monitoring_a.csv` correctly follows this rule and drops the columns completely.
* However, `flat_rate_saas_licensing_a.csv` and `annual_commitment_billed_monthly_a.csv` **include** the `RegionId` and `RegionName` headers, simply leaving the data fields blank (e.g., `,,,`). 

**The Fix:** Remove the `RegionId` and `RegionName` columns entirely from the `flat_rate_saas_licensing_a.csv` and `annual_commitment_billed_monthly_a.csv` files to comply with the stated rule.

Author: TF-3 agreed to include all columns across all examples for consistency. Every CSV now shares the same 38-column header. Columns that don't apply to a given scenario are left empty (null). Updated the intro text to reflect this.

Author: Fixed. All CSVs now carry the full column set, so the mismatch between the intro text and the flat-rate/annual-commitment headers is gone.

Reviewer: Confirmed resolved.

> These examples complement the existing SaaS examples by covering credit-based consumption, host-based monitoring, seat-based annual subscriptions, multi-unit PaaS usage, flat-rate licensing, annual commitment billed monthly, and tiered pricing with committed minimums. Each CSV includes only the columns relevant to its scenario. On-demand examples omit [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) columns; examples without regional billing omit [RegionId](#datasets.costandusage.regionid) and [RegionName](#datasets.costandusage.regionname).

Reviewer: > These examples complement the existing SaaS examples

This feels a bit AI-gen.  _Which_ existing SaaS examples?  Presumably this is a holdover from when you generated more examples that slot alongside the virtual currency examples, simple agreements, spend agreements, etc.  But the lay reader doesn't know what this is referring to.

Author: Removed the exhaustive scenario list from the intro paragraph. The overview table now serves as the navigation index, so the intro just notes the column-scoping approach. (f6e3756)

Reviewer: Looks good now; resolving.

## Credit-Based Consumption: On-Demand Data Platform Usage

> A data platform provider uses a credit-based consumption model. Customers consume credits based on warehouse compute activity and pay a fixed per-credit rate determined by their service edition. Storage is billed separately on a per-terabyte basis.

Reviewer: Might seem silly, but naming the actual data platform provider would be helpful for grounding the reader's understanding of the example.  AcmeCo, AwesomeSauce, LongCatIsLooooooooong are all acceptable.

Apply this pattern across all examples.

Author: See response to comment #5. Used distinct fictional provider names per scenario to ground the reader without referencing real companies. The narrative descriptions (e.g., "data platform service provider," "SaaS observability service provider") also help orient the reader to the billing pattern type.

Reviewer: Still not seeing the use of fictional provider names in this file.  Please address.

Author: Fixed in the same update. See reply on the parent thread.

> A data platform provider uses a credit-based consumption model. Customers consume credits based on warehouse compute activity and pay a fixed per-credit rate determined by their service edition. Storage is billed separately on a per-terabyte basis.

Reviewer: Would like to avoid shorthand use of "provider" in the spec going forward, given the heavy scrub of this that we did in 1.3.  Should this become "service provider" or "data generator"?

Please apply this decision globally across this appendix entry.

Author: Replaced all 22 occurrences of standalone "provider" with "service provider" throughout the markdown. (f6e3756)

Reviewer: Confirmed; resolving.

> The provider's on-demand pricing for this example (Enterprise edition):

Reviewer: Why the reference to Enterprise edition in parentheses?  This seems like the only spot you've mentioned this so far, so as the reader, I don't know what purpose this serves.

Author: Removed. It was a holdover from the original Snowflake-based scenario. The genericized version no longer references any specific edition. (f6e3756)

Reviewer: Confirmed; resolving.

The provider's pricing for this example (Essentials 50K plan):

| Component | Rate | Unit |
| :-------- | ---: | :--- |
| Plan fee (includes 50,000 emails) | &dollar;19.95 | Month |
| Overage | &dollar;0.00133 | Email |

This example covers two billing periods to show both under-minimum and over-minimum scenarios:

* **January 2025:** The customer sends 30,000 emails, below the 50,000 email allowance. 20,000 emails go unused.
* **February 2025:** The customer sends 65,000 emails, exceeding the allowance by 15,000.

**January charges (under minimum):**

The monthly plan fee of &dollar;19.95 appears as a Purchase charge. Two Usage charges split the commitment between used and unused portions:

* Purchase: &dollar;19.95 (plan fee covering 50,000 emails)
* Used: 30,000 emails, [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) = &dollar;11.97 (`30,000 / 50,000 x &dollar;19.95`)
* Unused: 20,000 emails, [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) = &dollar;7.98 (`20,000 / 50,000 x &dollar;19.95`)

> Total [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost): &dollar;19.95

Reviewer: AI says:

> Ensure that the ListCost and ContractedCost columns in the CSV (which you show as 39.9 and 26.6 respectively) are clearly explained as being calculated at the overage rate ($0.00133 \times \text{quantity}$). It might confuse users why the ListCost is higher than the BilledCost for a standard plan unless they realize it represents the "market value" of those emails.

Reviewer: I would also say that it could be valuable to have a snippet of the CSV example directly within the example.  Something like:

Here is how these charges appear in the data (relevant columns only):

| FOCUS Column | Purchase Charge | Usage (Used) | Usage (Unused) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **ChargeCategory** | Purchase | Usage | Usage |
| **CommitmentDiscountStatus** | *(null)* | Used | Unused |
| **ConsumedQuantity** | *(null)* | 30,000 | 20,000 |
| **BilledCost** | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;0.00 |
| **EffectiveCost** | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;11.97 | &dollar;7.98 |
| **ListCost** | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;39.90 | &dollar;26.60 |
| **ContractedCost** | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;39.90 | &dollar;26.60 |
| **ListUnitPrice** | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;0.00133 | &dollar;0.00133 |

Author: Added a new bullet to the Key observations explaining that ListCost and ContractedCost on Usage rows represent market value at the per-email rate (`$0.00133 x 30,000` = $39.90 for January Used). Also notes that the gap between ListCost and EffectiveCost shows the commitment discount benefit per row. (f6e3756)

Author: Added. The January charges now have a transposed table showing ChargeCategory, CommitmentDiscountStatus, ConsumedQuantity, BilledCost, EffectiveCost, ListCost, ContractedCost, and ListUnitPrice across Purchase, Used, and Unused columns. (f6e3756)

Reviewer: I like it -- but would the other examples not benefit from following this pattern?

Reviewer: AIs confirmation of this need:

### Inconsistent Use of Inline Data Snippets

**The Issue:** The final example, **"Tiered Pricing with Committed Minimum,"** includes a highly useful inline markdown table showing how the data appears (`| FOCUS Column | Purchase | Usage... |`). None of the other six examples include this kind of table. 

**The Fix:** It is heavily recommended to *add* similar "relevant columns only" tables to the other examples. It makes the specification much easier to read without forcing the user to download or open the CSV files to understand the point being made. Alternatively, if the author prefers not to add them, the table should be removed from the final example to maintain formatting parity across the document.

Author: Added inline tables to all 6 examples that were missing them. Every table now shows the same base set of columns (ChargeCategory, ChargeFrequency, quantities, all four cost columns, PricingUnit, PricingCategory). Commitment discount examples add CommitmentDiscountCategory and CommitmentDiscountStatus on top.

Author: Done. See the adjacent thread for details.

Reviewer: Confirmed.

| [Annual Commitment Billed Monthly](#annual-commitment-billed-monthly-seat-based-crm) | Annual term contract with monthly billing where the billed rate equals list price. No commitment discount despite the annual obligation. |
| [Tiered Pricing with Committed Minimum](#tiered-pricing-with-committed-minimum-email-api-platform) | Plan fee as a usage-denominated commitment discount with Used/Unused split and overage pricing. `CommitmentDiscountCategory` = "Usage". Two billing periods showing under- and over-minimum scenarios. |

## Credit-Based Consumption: On-Demand Data Platform Usage

A data platform service provider uses a credit-based consumption model. Customers consume credits based on warehouse compute activity and pay a fixed per-credit rate determined by their service edition. Storage is billed separately on a per-terabyte basis.

The service provider's on-demand pricing for this example:

| Service | SKU | Unit Price | Pricing Unit |
| :------ | :-- | ---------: | :----------- |
| Virtual Warehouse Compute | XS Warehouse | &dollar;3.00 | Credit |

> | Virtual Warehouse Compute | Medium Warehouse | &dollar;3.00 | Credit |

Reviewer: Why does the XS Warehouse cost exactly the same as the Medium Warehouse?

You mention immediately below that the credit consumption varies by warehouse size.  Perhaps you need to work that into this table.

Author: Good catch. The per-credit price is the same for both warehouse sizes, but the credit consumption rate differs. Added a "Credits/Hour" column to the pricing table so readers can see at a glance that an XS warehouse burns 1 credit per hour while a Medium burns 4.

Reviewer: Looks good now.

* [CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) is "Used". All 50 seats are occupied.
* [CommitmentDiscountQuantity](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountquantity) is 379.00 USD. This is the amount of spend consumed from the commitment in this [*charge period*](#glossary:chargeperiod).
* [ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) is the actual *resource* (the customer's project management site), not the *commitment discount*.

**Rounding Note:** The per-user rate of &dollar;7.58 is derived from `&dollar;4,550 / 12 months / 50 users` = &dollar;7.5833, rounded to two decimal places. This means `&dollar;7.58 x 50 users x 12 months` = &dollar;4,548.00, which is &dollar;2.00 less than the &dollar;4,550.00 purchase. In a full 12-month dataset, the final month's charge would include a true-up to ensure the sum of EffectiveCost across all usage rows equals the BilledCost of the purchase row.

[**CSV Example**](/specification/data/saas_examples/seat_based_saas_annual_a.csv)

## Multi-Unit Usage-Based PaaS: Database-as-a-Service

> A PaaS database [*service*](#glossary:service) provider bills different resource types on different units. The service provider offers dedicated database clusters with separate charges for compute, storage, and data transfer.

Reviewer: Why the glossary reference to service here?  You don't seem to be making the same reference in the other examples.

Author: The Host-Based example introduces the glossary link on first use; the remaining examples just use italics per convention.

Reviewer: Not following your reasoning.  This line includes a direct glossary link, it's not just italics.  But you didn't follow this pattern on, say, line 57 (or even set in italics).

Author: Fixed across a08f589, 4049535, and e2339cf. Three glossary terms now have consistent link-once formatting throughout: *service provider*, *service*, and *commitment discount*. Each is linked on first use per section (H1 intro and each H2 example), italicized on subsequent uses. "Service edition" is plain text (not a glossary term).

The editorial guidelines (`guidelines/contributors/editorial-guidelines.md`) say glossary terms should be linked "the first time they appear in a section." The commitment discount examples (`specification/appendix/commitment_discounts/commitment_discounts.md`) demonstrate this in practice: *commitment discount* is linked in the H1 intro, then re-linked on first use in the H2 "Overview," with subsequent uses italicized. Each H2 resets the link-once scope. Same pattern applied here.

* This scenario demonstrates that an annual contract does not automatically produce a [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) in FOCUS. The distinguishing factor is whether the commitment provides a price reduction from the standard rate.

[**CSV Example**](/specification/data/saas_examples/annual_commitment_billed_monthly_a.csv)

## Tiered Pricing with Committed Minimum: Email API Platform

A SaaS email API service provider offers tiered plans that include a monthly email allowance. Emails sent within the allowance are covered by the plan fee. Emails exceeding the allowance are billed at a per-email overage rate. The plan minimum functions as a usage-denominated [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) because the customer pays a fixed fee for a quantity of usage units.

The service provider's pricing for this example (Essentials 50K plan):

| Component | Rate | Unit |
| :-------- | ---: | :--- |

> | Plan fee (includes 50,000 emails) | &dollar;19.95 | Month |

Reviewer: ### `PricingUnit` Terminology for Monthly Fees

**The Issue:** There is a slight mismatch in how flat monthly fees are modeled across the examples. 
* In the **Tiered Pricing** markdown table, the Plan fee unit is listed as "Month". But in the corresponding CSV (`tiered_pricing_committed_minimum_a.csv`), the `PricingUnit` is set to **"Count"**. 
* In the **Flat-Rate SaaS Licensing** example (`flat_rate_saas_licensing_a.csv`), a very similar monthly fee uses a `PricingUnit` of **"Subscriptions"**. 

**The Fix:** Standardize how SaaS recurring plan fees are denominated in `PricingUnit` across the board (e.g., standardizing on "Months" or "Subscriptions" instead of the generic "Count").

Author: Fixed the mismatch between the markdown ("Month") and the CSV ("Count") for the tiered pricing plan fee. Each example uses whichever PricingUnit fits its billing model: "Subscriptions" for flat-rate, "Users" for seat-based, "Count" for the plan fee, etc. Happy to standardize further as a follow-up if the group wants.

Author: The PricingUnit values are intentionally different across these examples because they represent different billing models. Here's the breakdown:

**Current state across all billing scenario CSVs:**

| Example | Purchase/Fee PricingUnit | Usage PricingUnit | Why |
|---|---|---|---|
| Credit-Based | n/a (no purchase row) | Credits, TB | Domain-specific consumption units |
| Host-Based | n/a (no purchase row) | Hosts, GB | Domain-specific consumption units |
| Seat-Based | Count | Users | Purchase is a lump-sum prepayment, not a per-seat transaction |
| Multi-Unit PaaS | n/a (no purchase row) | Hours, GB | Domain-specific consumption units |
| Flat-Rate | n/a (usage row) | Subscriptions | The subscription IS the product |
| Annual Commitment | n/a (usage row) | Users | Per-seat monthly charge |
| Tiered Pricing | Count | Emails | Plan fee is a capacity commitment, not a subscription product |

**Why not standardize on "Subscriptions"?**

The existing SaaS examples in the spec already establish "Count" as the convention for lump-sum purchase and fee rows:

- `simple_saas_agreements_a1.csv`: PricingUnit = "Count" for a one-time SaaS service purchase
- `simple_saas_agreements_a2.csv`: PricingUnit = "Count" for a 500-license purchase
- `saas_spend_agreements_b1.csv`: PricingUnit = "Count" for a $1,200 prepayment
- `saas_spend_agreements_b2.csv`: same pattern

That's 8 CSVs using "Count" for this exact pattern. "Subscriptions" appears zero times in existing spec examples.

Changing to "Subscriptions" in the billing scenarios would fix a local inconsistency (within these 7 examples) while creating a global one (against the 12 existing SaaS example CSVs). Net negative.

**The Flat-Rate example is the intentional exception.** "Subscriptions" is correct there because the subscription itself is the billable unit. PricingQuantity = 1, PricingUnit = "Subscriptions" means "1 subscription at $349." There's no underlying usage metering. The Tiered Pricing plan fee, by contrast, buys a capacity floor (50,000 emails) with overage billing above it. Different billing model, different PricingUnit.

**What we added to make this clear:** commit 523235f added a key observation explaining why PricingUnit is "Count" on the Purchase row and "Emails" on Usage rows (line 386).

Happy to raise this as a broader convention question for the group if you think the "Count" pattern across all SaaS examples deserves revisiting. That would be a separate PR touching the existing simple/spend agreement CSVs as well.

Reviewer: Sounds good -- fair enough.  Thanks for fixing the mismatch between the markdown ("Month") and the CSV ("Count") for the tiered pricing plan fee.  Resolving.

| ConsumedUnit | Credits | Credits | TB |
| BilledCost | &dollar;600.00 | &dollar;960.00 | &dollar;115.00 |
| EffectiveCost | &dollar;600.00 | &dollar;960.00 | &dollar;115.00 |
| ListCost | &dollar;600.00 | &dollar;960.00 | &dollar;115.00 |
| ContractedCost | &dollar;600.00 | &dollar;960.00 | &dollar;115.00 |
| PricingUnit | Credits | Credits | TB |
| PricingCategory | Standard | Standard | Standard |

Key observations:

* Both warehouses share the same [ListUnitPrice](#datasets.costandusage.listunitprice) of &dollar;3.00 per credit. The credit price is determined by the service edition, not warehouse size.
* [ConsumedUnit](#datasets.costandusage.consumedunit) is "Credits" for compute and "TB" for storage. The credit is the service provider's unit of compute consumption.
* [ChargeFrequency](#datasets.costandusage.chargefrequency) is "Usage-Based" for compute (metered by credit consumption) and "Recurring" for storage (billed per TB per month).
* Storage has no [ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) or [ResourceName](#datasets.costandusage.resourcename) because it is an account-level charge, not tied to a specific [*resource*](#glossary:resource).

> * BilledCost and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) are equal on all rows. These two columns diverge when a purchase [*charge*](#glossary:charge) covers future usage (as with a [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount)), because the [*cash-based*](#glossary:cash-based-accounting) outflow is invoiced upfront while cost is recognized on an [*accrual basis*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) over time. With no such purchase *charges* here, the two views produce the same cost per row.

Reviewer: ### Accidental Deletion of Column Markdown Links

**The Issue:** During the text revisions, it looks like the author accidentally stripped out many of the markdown anchor links that point to the FOCUS column definitions (e.g., changing `[BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost)` to just `BilledCost`). 

This created a noticeable inconsistency where columns are linked in some bullet points, but not in others right next to them. 

**Examples of where links were dropped:**
* **Credit-Based Consumption:** The final bullet point now says `* BilledCost and [EffectiveCost]...` (`BilledCost` lost its link).
* **Seat-Based SaaS Subscription:** Under the **Usage Charge (April 2025)** section, almost all the links were removed. For example: `* BilledCost is &dollar;0.00...` and `* EffectiveCost is &dollar;379.00...` whereas the **Purchase Charge** section directly above it still correctly has `* [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) is &dollar;4,550.00...`
* **Annual Commitment Billed Monthly:** The first bullet point dropped the `BilledCost` link: `* BilledCost, [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost)...`
* **Tiered Pricing with Committed Minimum:** The final bullet points stripped links for `BilledCost`, `EffectiveCost`, and `ContractedCost`. 

**The Fix:** The author should do a quick sweep of the bullet points and restore the `[ColumnName](#datasets.costandusage.columnname)` formatting to ensure all FOCUS columns are properly hyperlinked to the spec definitions.

Author: Fixed in 78caa42. The specific examples you cited:

- **Credit-Based final bullet** (line 66): `[BilledCost]` link restored.
- **Seat-Based Usage Charge** (lines 170-177): column ID links restored.
- **Annual Commitment first bullet** (line 321): all four cost column links restored.
- **Tiered Pricing key observations** (lines 405-412): column links restored throughout.

* [RegionId](#datasets.costandusage.regionid) and [RegionName](#datasets.costandusage.regionname) are null. This service provider does not expose region in its billing. Some SaaS and PaaS service providers do bill by region, in which case these columns would be populated (see the Multi-Unit PaaS example below).
* [ResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.resourceid) and [ResourceName](#datasets.costandusage.resourcename) are null. The service provider bills at the *service* level (per host or per GB), not per individual monitored [*resource*](#glossary:resource).
* All three *services* share the [ServiceCategory](#datasets.costandusage.servicecategory) "Management and Governance" per the FOCUS allowed values for logging, monitoring, and observability *services*.
* BilledCost and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) are equal on all rows because there are no purchase *charges* covering future usage (see the Credit-Based Consumption example for a full explanation of when these columns diverge).

[**CSV Example**](/specification/data/saas_examples/host_based_saas_monitoring_a.csv)

> ## Seat-Based SaaS Subscription: Annual Upfront with Commitment Discount

Reviewer: ### Missing Commitment Quantity Columns in Markdown Tables

**The Issue:** In both the **Seat-Based SaaS Subscription** and **Tiered Pricing with Committed Minimum** examples, the text explicitly calls out the commitment quantities. For instance, the Seat-Based text notes:
* `CommitmentDiscountQuantity is 4,550.00...` (on the Purchase row)
* `CommitmentDiscountQuantity is 379.00 USD.` (on the Usage row)

However, neither `CommitmentDiscountQuantity` nor `CommitmentDiscountUnit` are included in the inline markdown tables for either of those examples. Since the purpose of these tables is to highlight the relevant columns being discussed, omitting the very columns referenced in the text forces the reader to open the CSV to follow along.

**The Fix:** Add `CommitmentDiscountQuantity` and `CommitmentDiscountUnit` rows to the inline markdown tables in both the Seat-Based and Tiered Pricing sections so they accurately reflect the key observations in the text.

Author: Added in 78caa42. Both rows now appear in all three tables:

- **Seat-Based** (lines 147-148): 4,550.00 / 379.00 USD
- **Tiered January** (lines 363-364): 50,000 / 30,000 / 20,000 Emails
- **Tiered February** (lines 392-393): 50,000 / 50,000 / *(null)* Emails

The service provider, TaskBoard Co, offers a project management platform with the following pricing for 50 users on the Standard plan:

| Billing Option | Unit Price | Monthly Cost (50 users) | Annual Cost |
| :------------- | ---------: | ----------------------: | ----------: |
| Monthly | &dollar;9.05/user/month | &dollar;452.50 | &dollar;5,430.00 |
| Annual | &dollar;7.58/user/month | &dollar;379.00 | &dollar;4,550.00 |

The annual option represents a ~16% discount versus monthly billing.

A customer subscribes to the Standard plan for 50 users on April 1, 2025. They choose the annual billing option, paying &dollar;4,550.00 upfront for a 12-month term ending April 1, 2026. All 50 seats are occupied in the first month.

Two charges appear in the April 2025 [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period):

Here is how these charges appear in the data (relevant columns only):

| FOCUS Column | Purchase | Usage (April) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| ChargeCategory | Purchase | Usage |
| ChargeFrequency | One-Time | Recurring |
| CommitmentDiscountCategory | Spend | Spend |
| CommitmentDiscountStatus | *(null)* | Used |

> | ConsumedQuantity | *(null)* | 50 |

Reviewer: Why no `ConsumedUnit`?  I think you need:

```| ConsumedUnit | *(null)* | Users |```

Author: Added in 78caa42. ConsumedUnit row at line 150:
| ConsumedUnit | *(null)* | Users |

The service provider's pricing for this example:

| Service | SKU | Unit Price | Pricing Unit |
| :------ | :-- | ---------: | :----------- |
| TeamSpace | Pro Unlimited | &dollar;349.00 | Subscriptions |

The service provider also offers an annual billing option at &dollar;299.00 per month (billed annually). This example uses the month-to-month option with no annual commitment.

A customer subscribes to the Pro Unlimited plan on a month-to-month basis. During January 2025, the customer's team of 35 people uses the platform.

One charge appears on the January invoice:

* Pro Unlimited: `1 Subscription x &dollar;349.00` = &dollar;349.00

Total [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost): &dollar;349.00

Here is how this charge appears in the data (relevant columns only):

| FOCUS Column | Pro Unlimited |
| :--- | :--- |
| ChargeCategory | Usage |
| ChargeFrequency | Recurring |
| ConsumedQuantity | 1 |
| ConsumedUnit | Subscriptions |
| BilledCost | &dollar;349.00 |
| EffectiveCost | &dollar;349.00 |
| ListCost | &dollar;349.00 |
| ContractedCost | &dollar;349.00 |

> | PricingUnit | Subscriptions |

Reviewer: Why no Pricing Quantity?

Author: Added in 78caa42. PricingQuantity row at line 272:
| PricingQuantity | 1 |

* Purchase: &dollar;19.95 (plan fee covering 50,000 emails)
* Used: 30,000 emails, [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) = &dollar;11.97 (`30,000 / 50,000 x &dollar;19.95`)
* Unused: 20,000 emails, EffectiveCost = &dollar;7.98 (`20,000 / 50,000 x &dollar;19.95`)

Total [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost): &dollar;19.95

Here is how the January charges appear in the data (relevant columns only):

| FOCUS Column | Purchase | Usage (Used) | Usage (Unused) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| ChargeCategory | Purchase | Usage | Usage |
| ChargeFrequency | Recurring | Usage-Based | Usage-Based |
| CommitmentDiscountCategory | Usage | Usage | Usage |
| CommitmentDiscountStatus | *(null)* | Used | Unused |
| ConsumedQuantity | *(null)* | 30,000 | *(null)* |
| ConsumedUnit | *(null)* | Emails | *(null)* |
| BilledCost | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;0.00 |
| EffectiveCost | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;11.97 | &dollar;7.98 |
| ListCost | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;39.90 | &dollar;26.60 |
| ContractedCost | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;39.90 | &dollar;26.60 |
| PricingUnit | Count | Emails | Emails |
| PricingCategory | Standard | Committed | Committed |

> **February charges (over minimum):**

Reviewer: ### Missing Markdown Table for February Overage

**The Issue:** The section for **January charges (under minimum)** includes a helpful inline markdown table showing how the data appears. However, the **February charges (over minimum)** section only has a bulleted list. 

**The Fix:** To maintain consistency and help readers visualize the overage pattern, please add a corresponding markdown table for the February charges right before the "Key observations" section. 

Here is the table you can drop in (AI-generated, please review before including):

```
| FOCUS Column | Purchase | Usage (Used) | Usage (Overage) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| ChargeCategory | Purchase | Usage | Usage |
| ChargeFrequency | Recurring | Usage-Based | Usage-Based |
| CommitmentDiscountCategory | Usage | Usage | *(null)* |
| CommitmentDiscountStatus | *(null)* | Used | *(null)* |
| ConsumedQuantity | *(null)* | 50,000 | 15,000 |
| ConsumedUnit | *(null)* | Emails | Emails |
| BilledCost | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;19.95 |
| EffectiveCost | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;19.95 |
| ListCost | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;66.50 | &dollar;19.95 |
| ContractedCost | &dollar;19.95 | &dollar;66.50 | &dollar;19.95 |
| PricingUnit | Count | Emails | Emails |
| PricingCategory | Standard | Committed | Standard |
```

Author: Added in 78caa42. February inline table at lines 386-401, mirroring the January structure. Includes CommitmentDiscountQuantity/Unit, ConsumedQuantity/Unit, all four cost columns, PricingUnit, and PricingCategory across Purchase, Used, and Overage columns.

# Billing Scenario Examples

The following examples illustrate how [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) behave across common software as a service (SaaS) and platform as a service (PaaS) billing models. Each scenario uses a fictional [*service provider*](#glossary:service%20provider) with illustrative pricing and demonstrates a distinct billing pattern that SaaS or PaaS data generators may implement via the FOCUS specification.

Each example targets a specific billing pattern. All examples share a consistent column set; columns not applicable to a given scenario contain null values.

> | Scenario | Service Provider | What You'll Learn |

Reviewer: @Matt-Cowsert 
On PR #2115 (where I looked to codify and extend your fictitious data generator names below), I have received feedback from @kk09v and @thecloudman that some of these names conflict with real-world examples.

I have revised those per [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/2115/files#r3010814596).  Pending alignment on those names (hopefully today in Mar 30 Maintainers), you will need to revise the use of the names here to match.

Author: I'm aligned with this approach @shawnalpay and have left minor feedback as well on #2115. I can adjust with what is currently in there if that's easier, but I didn't know if we needed to finalize #2115 first, then apply here.

Reviewer: @Matt-Cowsert I've accepted all your feedback on #2115.  Yes, please proactively apply the entities from #2115 here.

Author: @shawnalpay I've made the updates, should be good now. We can resolve this thread at your discretion.

Reviewer: Looks good!

The *service provider*'s on-demand pricing for this example:

| Service | SKU | Unit Price | Pricing Unit | Credits/Hour |
| :------ | :-- | ---------: | :----------- | -----------: |
| Virtual Warehouse Compute | XS Warehouse | &dollar;3.00 | Credits | 1 |
| Virtual Warehouse Compute | Medium Warehouse | &dollar;3.00 | Credits | 4 |
| Storage | Active Storage | &dollar;23.00 | TB | n/a |

Credit consumption varies by warehouse size. An XS warehouse consumes 1 credit per hour. A Medium warehouse consumes 4 credits per hour.

A customer runs two warehouses in the US East region during January 2025:

* XS warehouse (analyst workload): 200 hours of runtime = 200 credits consumed
* Medium warehouse (ETL workload): 80 hours of runtime = 320 credits consumed (4 credits/hour)
* 5 TB of active storage

Three usage charges appear on the January invoice:

* XS Warehouse: `200 Credits x &dollar;3.00` = &dollar;600.00
* Medium Warehouse: `320 Credits x &dollar;3.00` = &dollar;960.00

> * Active Storage: `5 TB x &dollar;23.00` = &dollar;115.00

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* XS Warehouse: `200 Credits x `&dollar;`3.00` = &dollar;600.00
* Medium Warehouse: `320 Credits x `&dollar;`3.00` = &dollar;960.00
* Active Storage: `5 TB x `&dollar;`23.00` = `&dollar;`115.00
```

Author: Thanks for catching this, @davidearney. The `&dollar;` HTML entities don't render inside markdown backtick code spans — they show as literal `&dollar;` text instead of `$`.

Rather than splitting the backtick spans around the entity (which creates fragmented rendering), I used literal `$` inside code spans and kept `&dollar;` outside them where the build pipeline needs it. Applied consistently across all 7 examples (230f5731).

## Host-Based SaaS Monitoring: Monthly On-Demand Usage

A SaaS observability [*service provider*](#glossary:service%20provider), StackLens, offers multiple monitoring [*services*](#glossary:service) billed on different units: host-based pricing for infrastructure and application performance monitoring, and volume-based pricing for log ingestion.

The *service provider*'s on-demand pricing for this example:

| Service | SKU | Unit Price | Pricing Unit |
| :------ | :-- | ---------: | :----------- |
| Infrastructure Monitoring | Infra Pro | &dollar;18.00 | Hosts |
| APM | APM Standard | &dollar;36.00 | Hosts |
| Log Management | Log Ingestion | &dollar;0.10 | GB |

A customer uses the *service provider*'s monitoring platform on a month-to-month basis with no annual commitment. During January 2025, the customer's usage is:

* 25 infrastructure hosts monitored
* 10 APM hosts monitored (a subset of the infrastructure hosts, billed independently)
* 150 GB of logs ingested

Three usage charges appear on the January invoice:

* Infrastructure Monitoring: `25 Hosts x &dollar;18.00` = &dollar;450.00
* APM: `10 Hosts x &dollar;36.00` = &dollar;360.00

> * Log Management: `150 GB x &dollar;0.10` = &dollar;15.00

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Infrastructure Monitoring: `25 Hosts x `&dollar;`18.00` = &dollar;450.00
* APM: `10 Hosts x `&dollar;`36.00` = `&dollar;`360.00
* Log Management: `150 GB x `&dollar;`0.10` = &dollar;15.00
```

| CommitmentDiscountQuantity | 4,550.00 | 379.00 |
| CommitmentDiscountUnit | USD | USD |
| ConsumedQuantity | *(null)* | 50 |
| ConsumedUnit | *(null)* | Users |
| BilledCost | &dollar;4,550.00 | &dollar;0.00 |
| EffectiveCost | &dollar;0.00 | &dollar;379.00 |
| ListCost | &dollar;5,430.00 | &dollar;452.50 |
| ContractedCost | &dollar;5,430.00 | &dollar;452.50 |
| PricingUnit | Count | Users |
| PricingCategory | Standard | Committed |

**Purchase Charge:** [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Purchase" with [ChargeFrequency](#datasets.costandusage.chargefrequency) "One-Time". The full annual amount is invoiced in a single payment.
* The [*charge period*](#glossary:chargeperiod) spans the entire commitment term: April 1, 2025 through April 1, 2026.
* [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) is &dollar;4,550.00. This is the [*cash-based*](#glossary:cash-based-accounting) invoiced amount for the annual subscription.
* [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) is &dollar;0.00. The purchase covers future usage. Cost is recognized on an [*accrual basis*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) as usage occurs.

> * [ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost) is &dollar;5,430.00 (`50 users x &dollar;9.05/user/month x 12 months`). This represents the cost without the annual discount.

Reviewer 4: Suggested change
      
    
    
      
          
            
            * [ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost) is &dollar;5,430.00 (`50 users x &dollar;9.05/user/month x 12 months`). This represents the cost without the annual discount.
          
          
            
            * [ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost) is &dollar;5,430.00 (`50 users x `&dollar;`9.05/user/month x 12 months`). This represents the cost without the annual discount.

* [CommitmentDiscountCategory](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountcategory) is "Spend" because the commitment is denominated in dollars, not usage units.
* [CommitmentDiscountQuantity](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountquantity) is 4,550.00 [CommitmentDiscountUnit](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountunit) (USD). This is the total spend eligible for consumption over the term.
* [PricingCategory](#datasets.costandusage.pricingcategory) is "Standard". The purchase of the [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) is at the agreed-upon rate.

**Usage Charge (April 2025):** [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage" with [PricingCategory](#datasets.costandusage.pricingcategory) "Committed". The usage is covered by the annual purchase.
* [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) is &dollar;0.00. No additional invoiced amount. The usage is covered by the purchase charge.
* [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) is &dollar;379.00. This is the [*accrual-based*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting) recognized portion of the annual commitment: `&dollar;7.58/user x 50 users`.

> * [ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost) is &dollar;452.50 (`50 users x &dollar;9.05/user`). The monthly list cost without the annual discount.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [ListCost](#datasets.costandusage.listcost) is &dollar;452.50 (`50 users x `&dollar;`9.05/user`). The monthly list cost without the annual discount.
```
